Venture capital (VC) plays an important role in shaping portfolio companies' policies and eventual successes, as shown by most existing literature (Sahlman, 1990; Lerner, 1995; Hellmann and Puri, 2002; Bottazzi et al., 2008; and Puri and Zarutskie, 2012). The literature, however, has focused mostly on economic outcomes and ignored the impact of VCs on their portfolio companies' social performance. As argued by Zingales (2015) in his presidential address to the American Finance Association, understanding the social impact of finance is an equally important, if not a more important, task. Along this line, the recent literature shows that other types of institutional investors affect corporate social performance (Dyck et al., 2019; Hartzmark and Sussman, 2019; Chen et al., 2020; and Krueger et al., 2020). Compared with other types of institutional investors, VCs are more actively involved in their portfolio companies, yet their investment horizon is often shorter. As such, VCs could have different preferences and incentives than other institutional investors, and thus have a different impact on the social performance of their portfolio companies.

VC involvement and monitoring can negatively affect corporate social responsibility (CSR) performance if VCs pursue financial returns at the expense of society. VCs could pressure their portfolio firms to maximize shareholder value while creating negative social and environmental impacts. In particular, compared with other institutional investors, VCs have shorter investment horizons, and hence may not care about the long term welfare of other stakeholders (Chemmanur et al., 2011). On the other hand, VCs, like other institutional investors, could be concerned with social norms and motivated by social returns (Dyck et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020). Furthermore, VCs may value the benefits brought by better CSR performance, such as product market differentiation and insurance against negative outcomes, more than other investors (Servaes and Tamayo, 2013; Lins et al., 2017; Albuquerque et al., 2019; and Hong et al., 2019). In particular, the social performance of VC firms may affect their ability to raise money from their investors (Hartzmark and Sussman, 2019). As such, VCs may push for better CSR performance of their portfolio companies. It is therefore unclear ex ante how VC involvement and monitoring could affect their portfolio companies' CSR performance.

We examine the effect of VC involvement and monitoring on CSR performance using data from China. One challenge in studying the relationship between VC and CSR is that VCs are involved in mostly private and newly public companies; however, most CSR databases, such as the MSCI KLD index and Thomson Reuters' ASSET4 ratings, cover mostly large and mature companies. Several unique features of the Chinese VC industry and the CSR rating data enable us to overcome this challenge. First, the CSR rating data, provided by Hexun.com, cover all publicly traded companies in China and allow us to examine the impact of VCs on CSR performance of newly public companies.2 Second, VCs in China often remain involved in their portfolio companies and influence the operation and governance of those companies long after IPO (Barry et al., 1990; Hochberg, 2012; Wongsunwai, 2013; and Iliev and Lowry, 2021). According to Zero2IPO's data, over 52.86% of VCs in China held shares of their portfolio companies more than three years after the IPO during 2008–2015. In our sample, the median VC also remains in their portfolio companies three years after the IPO. Third, Chinese VCs hold significant stakes in their portfolio companies after IPO. In our sample, conditional on VCs remaining in their portfolio companies after the IPO, VCs hold an average of 6.78% of the total shares of the portfolio companies. VCs therefore remain as one of the largest, if not the largest, shareholder of their portfolio companies even after IPOs in China.3 This provides us with a unique opportunity to examine the effect of VC on their portfolio companies' CSR performance.

Examining newly public companies also makes it easier to deal with the selection problem common in the VC literature (Sørensen, 2007 and Da Rin et al., 2013) because we do not use the variation in which companies receive VC funding. Instead, we exploit the variation generated by VC exit. In particular, the securities law in China mandates that VCs, along with other investors who also hold shares before the IPO, disclose all their selling transactions after the IPO. We are therefore able to identify the exact dates of final VC exits after the IPO. Focusing on newly public firms in China, we first conduct a stacked difference-in-differences (DID) analysis of the impact of VC exit on their portfolio companies' CSR performance. In this setting, we exploit the changes in VC involvement generated by VC exit; as such, we suffer less from the selection issue. The remaining endogeneity concern is the timing of VC exit, which we address later.4

With the stacked DID, we find that the CSR performance of VC-backed companies improves after the exit of VC. In particular, VC involvement is negatively associated with portfolio companies' responsibility toward employees, suppliers and customers, and the environment. In sharp contrast, VC involvement is positively associated with portfolio companies' responsibility toward shareholders and other measures of shareholder value, suggesting that VCs pressure their portfolio companies to maximize shareholder value at the expense of other stakeholders and the environment.5 To trace the timing of the negative effect of VC on CSR, we find that the positive effect of VC exit on CSR performance appears only after, but not before, the exit of VCs, thereby suggesting that the results are unlikely to be driven by VCs' reaction to changes in firm fundamentals.

The VC exit decisions are certainly not random (Gompers and Lerner, 1998; Lin and Smith, 1998; and Paeglis and Veeren, 2013), which could bias the stacked DID results. To mitigate this concern, we use the age of the VC funds as an instrumental variable for VC exit decisions. Most VC funds are organized as limited partnerships and have a limited lifetime. VCs are more likely to exit from their portfolio companies when approaching the end of their lifetime. As such, the VC fund age is likely to satisfy the relevance condition. To satisfy the exclusion condition, the age of VC funds can only affect their portfolio companies' CSR performance through its impact on exit timing. However, as documented in Kandel et al. (2011) and Barrot (2017), the age of VC funds can affect investment choices. If the choices are correlated with CSR performance, the exclusion condition will be violated. To mitigate this concern, we show that the age of VC funds has no effect on CSR performance or changes in CSR performance before the exit of VCs, thereby suggesting that the fund age is unlikely to directly impact CSR performance. Using this instrument, we find similar results from the two-stage least square (2SLS) regressions, suggesting that the negative effect of VC on CSR performance is likely to be causal.

Next, we proceed to examine the heterogeneity of the effect of VC on CSR performance. First, we distinguish between VCs that sit on the board of directors of their portfolio companies and those that do not. Consistent with the fact that VCs on the board can monitor more effectively, we find that the negative impact of VC on CSR performance concentrates on VCs that are on the board of directors. Second, we explore the heterogeneity in VC experience, performance, and reputation. We construct three proxies, namely the total amount of historical investment, the total numbers of firms brought to IPOs, and the share of the total market value of companies brought to IPOs, as measures of VC experience, performance, and reputation. Using these proxies, we find that the negative effect of VC on CSR performance is driven mostly by less experienced, badly performing, or less reputable VCs. This result suggests that the negative impact may disappear as VCs become more mature and care more about their reputation. Because domestic VCs in China are relatively young and less experienced, what we document in this paper may not be generalizable to more developed countries, in which VCs are more mature and more experienced.

Finally, we explore the heterogeneity in the types of VC sponsors. Specifically, we categorize VCs into three groups, those sponsored by domestic private institutions (PVC), those sponsored by local governments (GVC), and those sponsored by foreign institutions (FVC). Interestingly, both PVCs and GVCs have a strong negative impact on their portfolio companies' CSR performance. However, FVCs have no negative impact on CSR performance. The results again suggest that the negative impact of VCs on CSR performance may be limited to Chinese domestic VCs.

Our paper contributes to the literature on the impact of VCs on their portfolio companies. The early literature shows that VCs are actively involved in their portfolio companies. VCs often sit on the board of directors, help to raise capital, and mentor company founders (Sahlman, 1990; Lerner, 1994; Lerner, 1995; Hellmann and Puri, 2000). Hellmann and Puri (2002) find that VCs improve professionalization of their portfolio companies. Wasserman (2006) and Kaplan et al. (2012) both find that VCs are involved in CEO replacement. Bottazzi et al. (2008) measure VCs' value adding services by looking at specific actions VCs take in their portfolio companies. Bernstein et al. (2016) identify the causal effect of VC monitoring by exploiting exogenous variation in VC monitoring intensity generated by the introduction of new airline routes between VCs and their portfolio companies. Most papers in this literature examine the impact of VCs on operation, innovation, and successful exit (IPO or merger). Our paper contributes to the literature by instead studying the impact of VC on portfolio companies' social performance.

In this regard, our paper is closest to Alakent et al. (2020) and Li et al. (2021). Alakent et al. (2020) find that US firms backed by VCs before IPOs have worse CSR performance. Instead, Li et al. (2021) find that VC-backed Chinese firms have better CSR performance. Our paper differs from these two papers along the following dimensions. First, both papers examine the impact of VC backing during the pre-IPO period on CSR performance after IPO; therefore, it is unclear why the impact of VC could last long after IPO. We instead identify the impact of actual VC involvement on CSR performance. Second, both papers rely only on cross-sectional variation in VC-backing, while we only rely on time series variation in VC involvement. The time-series variation allows us to better mitigate the selection bias. Furthermore, we are able to use the age of VC funds to generate plausibly exogenous variation in VC exits and hence are able to further mitigate endogeneity concerns.6

Our paper also contributes to the literature on the causes and consequences of CSR performance. Ferrell et al. (2016) find that well-governed firms with less severe agency problems engage more in CSR. Dyck et al. (2019) and Chen et al. (2020) find that institutional investors promote CSR. Dai et al. (2020) and Schiller (2020) find that corporate customers shape their suppliers' CSR practices. Houston and Shan (2021) find that banks can influence their borrowers' CSR practices. Other papers in the literature examine the effect of CSR on firm value (Servaes and Tamayo, 2013; Flammer, 2015), knowledge spillover (Flammer and Kacperczyk, 2019), disaster insurance (Lins et al., 2017; Hong et al., 2019), and access to finance (Cheng et al., 2014). Our paper contributes to the literature by studying the impact of VC on CSR performance. Given the critical importance of VC in promoting innovation and economic growth, understanding their social impact can inform better public policy.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the sample construction process; Section 3 presents the baseline results of the effect of VC on CSR performance; Section 4 presents the results on cross-sectional heterogeneity of the impact of VC on CSR performance; Section 5 provides some additional robustness test results; and Section 6 concludes the paper.
